Rock comet meteor shower presented by
science at NASA
every year in mid-december astronomers
look up in the sky and witness a mystery
it announces itself with a flurry of
shooting stars for several nights in a
row dozens to hundreds of meteors per
hour cut across the glistening
constellations of winner each one a
piece of a puzzle waiting to be solved
it's the Geminid meteor shower set to
peak on December 13th and 14th says bill
Cooke of NASA's meteoroid environment
office although the Geminids come every
year we still don't fully understand him
most meteor showers are caused by icy
comets which spewed Jets of meteoroids
when they are heated by sunlight a
recent example the Orionid meteor shower
of October was caused by Halley's Comet
the Geminids are different the parent is
not a comet but a weird rocky object
named 3200 Phaethon when 3200 Phaethon
was discovered in 1983 by NASA's IRAs
satellite astronomers quickly realized
that they had found the source of the
Geminids the orbit of 3200 Phaethon was
such a close match to that of the
Geminid debris stream no other
conclusion was possible yet here was a
puzzler
everything about 3200 Phaethon suggested
an asteroid not a typical comet in fact
3200 Phaethon resembles main-belt
asteroid Pallas so much it could well be
a 5 kilometer chip off that 544
kilometre block if 3200 Phaethon broke
apart from asteroid Pallas as some
researchers believe then Geminid
meteoroids might be debris from the
breakup speculates Cooke there is
however another possibility
perhaps 3200 Phaethon is a rock comet
a rock comet is a new kind of object
being discussed by some astronomers it
is essentially an asteroid that comes
very close to the Sun so close that
solar heating scorches dusty debris
right off its rocky surface rock comets
could thus grow comet-like tails made
him gravelly debris that produced meteor
showers on earth could this be the
answer
to test the idea researchers turned to
NASA's twin stereo spacecraft which are
designed to study solar activity in June
2009 stereo watched 3200 Phaethon
passing only 15 solar diameters from the
sun's surface would happen next
surprised UCLA planetary scientist David
Jewett and Jing Lee who analyzed the
data 3200 Phaethon unexpectedly
brightened by a factor of 2 they wrote
the most likely explanation is that
faith on ejected dust perhaps in
response to a breakdown of surface rocks
through thermal fracture and
decomposition cracking of hydrated
minerals in the intense heat of the Sun
so according to the stereo observations
3200 Phaethon does behave like a rock
comet the rock comet hypothesis is
compelling but jeweled and Lee point out
a problem the amount of dust 3200
Phaethon ejected during its Sun
encounter added a paltry 0.01% to the
mass of the Geminid debris strain not
enough to keep the debris stream stocked
up with meteoroids for the annual
display of shooting stars 3200 Phaethon
is not spewing enough dust to account
for the Geminids could the rock comet
have been more active in the past we
just don't know
Seska forecasters expect Geminid meteor
rates to top 100 per hour when the
shower peaks on the moonless nights of
December 13th and 14th 2012 Cooke
encourages sky watchers to go out look
up and savor the mystery for more news
about mysterious happenings in the night
sky visit science.nasa.gov